With the fourth industrial revolution, the computations are being used everywhere in today’s world. The storage, access and transmission of essential, private and crucial information is the integral part of an organization. And cryptography is the tool which is the heart of security procedures and systems to protect this information and services. The traditional cryptosystems focus on the high security and ignores the capabilities of constrained devices, which motivated for the development of a domain for Lightweight cryptosystems. For light weight cryptography, different approaches were used in order to develop new ciphers which provide high performance in highly constrained environments. The approaches used were improve existing ciphers, mix existing ciphers or design new cipher for specific domains. Block ciphers like AES and DES are standardized cryptosystems feasible for constrained devices. AES acts as a benchmark for new ciphers. New block ciphers like DESX, DESL, DESXL, PRESENT are based on DES and AES ciphers. In order to reduce the GE, KATAN family ciphers uses hardwired key. Some other new ciphers used in constrained devices are SEA, Hummingbird2, ITUbee, NOEKEON, and Piccolo. For RFID and EPC domain specific devices, EPCBC and PRINT cipher give high performance in highly constrained environment.  In the domain of constrained devices, the Stream ciphers are always inferior to Block ciphers despite many improvements, due to its lengthy initialization. But despite that, Stream ciphers are still in use due to its simplicity, speed at hardware level, and its nature of encryption without knowing the size of the plaintext. The traditional stream ciphers used like RC4, A5/1 and E0 are proved to be insecure. But AES in CTR made can be used up to some extent. The eStream project has played a major role in evaluating new stream ciphers for constrained devices. For faster throughput at software level, Salsa20 has shown significant advantage, by using basic mathematical operations and identical encryption and decryption process. For constrained devices, Grain and TRIVIUM uses small memory without compromising the security capabilities. Some new stream ciphers like BEAN, QUAVIUM and WG-7 give high throughput using small memory size. For RFID Tags, the cipher A2U2 gives high throughput and huge reduction of size to 300GE using KATAN’s principle. The standard and widely used Hash functions like MD5, SHA1/2, ARMADILLO have quite large GE (greater than 3000) leading them to be infeasible for constrained devices. But using PRESENT’s design principles some new hash functions are evolved like C-PRESNT, H-PRESENT, PRESENT-DM which have GE less than 3000. Due to requirement of a new SHA3 Hash function, NIST’s SHA3 competition led to evolution of new hash functions, but they are not resource constraint friendly, but it gave a new design trend for Hash functions using sponge construction and hence led to Hash functions for resource constrained devices such as SQUASH, GLUON, Quark, Photon, and Spongent.